How to build an encounter:

1. Determine xp budget/role of the encounter using this guide. https://2e.aonprd.com/Rules.aspx?ID=497

2. Determine monsters up to the xp budget that will be used, either reuse previously created monsters or create new ones. Environment/NPC allies/tactics may make the fight easier or more difficult than expected, use judgment on how much effective + or – xp this might make the encounter.

3. Determine tactics of monsters (if they aren't mindless), determine what might make them surrender/retreat to another room or if they will fight to the death.

4. Give brief 2 – 4 sentences of what the GM would read/paraphrase for what the PCs see of the area/enemies

5. Potentially determine loot if you are organizing the act, if not give loot recommendations based on how much xp budget % of a level the encounter is. 
https://2e.aonprd.com/Rules.aspx?ID=581

How to write up the encounter:

(Location, Difficulty, expected level)
DINING HALL Moderate-Severe 5
(Description)
'Rounded stairs lead down into this flooded room. Long tables and chairs, the remains of a once glorious dining hall, drift as flotsam in the water. The top of a mostly submerged doorway can be seen on the eastern wall and a massive hole gapes in the northern one.'
(Enemies and information on the enemies
Creatures: Two giant water cobras lurk amid the floating debris in the room 
(Tactics)
Tactics: DC 20 nature for command animal to let one person pass, DC 22 for the party. Will fight until 1 remains at 20 or fewer hp then will flee.
(Creatures stats, environment reasons for difficulty)
Water Cobra(2) CREATURE 5 Variant emperor cobra 
+ difficulty water difficult terrain that does not impede the foe

Nice to have:

1. Give encounter design for 5 players, whether adding elite template, an additional weaker enemy, or potentially splitting a strong enemy into 2 weaker versions

2. Check that encounter is balanced for 3 players, but the players are 1 level higher than recommended for the current area.(Math usually works out fine for this)
